---
title: "Age-related differences in transient gamma band activity during working memory maintenance through adolescence"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/neuroImage2023
excerpt: " "
date: 2023-07-01
venue: NeuroImage
paperurl: 'https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.09.06.556453v1.full'
citation: "McKeon, S. D. et al. Age-related differences in transient gamma band activity during working memory maintenance through adolescence. NeuroImage 120112 (2023) doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120112"
---
[<b>[PDF]</b>](https://shanemckeon.github.io/files/neuroimagePub.pdf)

ABSTRACT  
Adolescence is a stage of development characterized by neurodevelopmental specialization of cognitive processes. In particular, working memory continues to improve through adolescence, with increases in response accuracy and decreases in response latency continuing well into the twenties. Human electroencephalogram (EEG) studies indicate that gamma oscillations (35–65 Hz) during the working memory delay period support the maintenance of mnemonic information guiding subsequent goal-driven behavior, which decrease in power with development. Importantly, recent electrophysiological studies have shown that gamma events, more so than sustained activity, may underlie working memory maintenance during the delay period. However, developmental differences in gamma events during working memory have not been studied. Here, we used EEG in conjunction with a novel spectral event processing approach to investigate age-related differences in transient gamma band activity during a memory guided saccade (MGS) task in 164 10- to 30-year-olds. Total gamma power was found to significantly decrease through adolescence, replicating prior findings. Results from the spectral event pipeline showed age-related decreases in the mean power of gamma events and trial-by-trial power variability across both the delay period and fixation epochs of the MGS task. In addition, we found that while event number decreased with age during the fixation period, the developmental decrease during the delay period was more dramatic, resulting in an increase in event spiking from fixation to delay in adolescence but not adulthood. While average power of the transient gamma events was found to mediate age-related differences in total gamma power in the fixation and delay periods, the number of gamma events was related to total power in only the delay period, suggesting that the power of gamma events may underlie the sustained gamma activity seen in EEG literature while the number of events may directly support age-related improvements in working memory maintenance. Our findings provide compelling new evidence for mechanistic changes in neural processing characterized by refinements in neural function as behavior becomes optimized in adulthood.
